The ultimate aim is cheaper, faster,
better.
>> Mhm.
>> Pharmaceutical companies claim correctly
in some cases, incorrectly in [music]
some other cases, that the reason that
novel medicines cost hundreds of
thousands of dollars is because 90% of
them fail [music]
>> in early trials. If you could change
that number from 90% to even let's say
60%. You would dramatically change the
economics of medicines. Yeah,
>> a human being takes [music] 8 months to
write an IND machine learning enable AI
native system could take 8 hours to
write that same IND survey the
literature [music] you know come up with
you know
>> take an initial stab at the draft like
big stack exactly
>> if you know me at all you know that I
love tracking my own health data
>> I am obsessed with my Whoop and I use it
religiously to track my [music] sleep my
movement and now my biological age and I
truly [music] believe that this is just
the beginning. AI can help us unlock a
world where we heal faster and live
better, longer lives.
My guest today, Sedartha Mukerji, is at
[music] the cutting edge of a very
specific application of AI in health,
drug discovery. His Pulitzer [music]
Prize-winning book, The Emperor of All
Maladies, redefined our understanding of
cancer. [music]
Sid has now co-founded Manis AI with
Reed Hoffman to accelerate drug
discovery through AI. In a world where
traditional drug development [music] is
too inefficient, too expensive, and
slow, Manis is aiming for faster,
cheaper, life-saving cures.
>> Welcome to Pioneers of AI. I'm so
excited for our conversation. My
pleasure.
>> So you are a true polymath. You're a
cancer researcher. You're an author. You
now have Manis AI. I am curious um yeah
take us back to the early days of your
journey. How did you get interested in
cancer and medicine?
>> Um so when I was 18 years old, I took
probably the most consequential and
longest trip of my life, which is when I
came to Stanford University as an
undergraduate. Um those days uh were
very different days. I remember no cell
phones, no
>> um no email. Um so
>> from India where
grew up in Delhi,
>> Delhi.
>> Um and there were four students from
India, four undergraduates in total um
at Stanford uh at that those years. my
second year in became more and more
interested in genetics in particular
cancer genetics and I knocked and this
was what you could do at a place like
Stanford. I imagine you can do it in
other places too. But I knocked on Paul
Berg's door. Um Paul Berg was had won
the Nobel Prize for um inventing gene
cloning.
>> Mhm.
>> Um or recominant DNA. Uh and [snorts]
not only that, this is very important.
Um Paul had then organized uh what's now
known as the Oyomar conferences. Um and
these were conferences to to consider uh
placing a moratorum on recominant DNA
and genetic technology until the ethical
legal and biosafety issues had been
figured out.
>> Yeah.
>> And that combination of someone who
could span these two worlds um a world
of um what I would call the humanistic
sciences
>> um and the world of pure science. uh the
word of how science impacts humanity uh
or human beings uh either directly or at
a population level was very was very
attractive to me. And so I knocked on
Paul's door and I said um Paul I'd like
to come and work with you. Um and I was
I was a second year undergraduate.
>> Uhhuh.
>> Um and I don't know maybe maybe Paul was
in a very particularly good mood that
day. He said sure come work with me. And
so that began a uh 40-year relationship
>> in which we have been had been friends
and so forth. The point of this of
course is that and we would meet often
um and I would every time I was in the
Bay Area he and I would have lunch
together. But the important thing was
that it was with Paul that I began to
learn that science has a human
>> aspect and and everything that we do
>> in human interactions in human lives can
be taken back to science. Yeah.
>> And that was very important formative
moment for me.
>> Yeah, that's that's amazing. And
obviously this is an AI podcast and it's
it's it's still extremely relevant
>> and this whole idea and it's a recurrent
theme in my life.
I take scientific work, try to distill
it into readable forms, try to explain
it to myself, to the world and then I
take it back from there into either the
AI world or etc. and then try to learn
something from
>> from history and from what I wrote and
from what I thought about while I was
writing.
>> Yeah, I am curious about how you started
writing like when did that happen and of
course your book won a Pulitzer Pri
prize. Yeah. What got you curious about
writing and also documenting I I guess
when you were putting the book together?
>> Yeah, I mean the the book which
eventually so I should say that the
Emperor All Meladies is coming. It's his
15th year anniversary is coming out in a
new edition um with four additional
chapters and a massive new additions
because of so much that's happened. The
book began as a journal. Um, and then I
soon realized that it was much bigger
than a journal that there would be
there's a lot there was a lot more to
say.
>> Yeah.
>> And a lot more to think about. Even as
an oncologist, as a cancer doctor, as a
cancer scientist, I didn't know so much
about why or how I we researchers,
scientists, doctors, patients had
arrived here now. Um, and that's how uh
that's how this whole effort began. You
know, I'm Egyptian, so I [clears throat]
was struck that in your book, the
earliest references to cancer were
actually in ancient Egyptian texts. Um,
so we've been grappling with cancer for
for a long time.
What have we learned from the evol, you
know, from the evolution of this disease
over the years?
>> Well, we've learned a lot. I mean, you
know, it would be hard to distill it in
a few sentences, but the big the big
picture is that um first of all, cancer
is a genetic disease. It is a uh it
occurs because of changes in genes that
either activate or inactivate cellular
growth and in doing so change the way
the cells um
uh the original cancer cell takes in
nutrients,
performs metabolism,
alters the way it um uh uses energy. Uh
but it's a cell where the where the
genes have mutated. So that's the first
thing. The second thing we've learned is
that the mutations can come from many
sources.
>> Um they can come from random chance. Uh
which is when when cells divide they
could make a mistake in copying.
>> And so the daughter cell the cell that's
born could have a mutation or a change
in the genes. They can come from
inherited changes. So
>> they can come from your uh parents' DNA.
>> Um they can come from viruses.
um in particular some viruses that can
either cause mutations or introduce new
genes into cells.
>> Yeah.
>> And uh number four, they can come from
carcinogens from chemical or
environmental insults um that uh alter
the genetic makeup of your cells.
>> Yeah,
>> that's the second thing we've learned.
And maybe the third thing that I'll say
that we've learned that's sort of very
globally important is that we now know
that cancer doesn't occur in isolation
but rather it utilizes its environment
its micro environment as we its tissue
environment to essentially sustain
itself. It borrows nutrients and signals
>> and that's why only certain cancers grow
in only certain kinds of places. So of
course there many many many many details
we've learned
>> but those would be sort of very high
level um three sort of very big lessons
in cancer
>> and I think what a lot of your writing
has done too is that it's opened this
kind of science and these findings so
much wider audience and humanized it and
made it accessible right
>> well absolutely I I hope it has the book
is written for everyone cancer
biologists read it uh young doctors read
it um patients read
A very interesting group of people who
read it are people who might be
completely outside the field but have an
idea about it
>> and might come and write me a message
saying oh what about trying you know has
anyone thought about trying this that or
the other
>> and that's why the field is constantly
mobile
>> and that mobility is very important to
me because it allows me to explore new
spaces for discovering new drugs or
making new medicines and um changing the
way we treat cancer.
>> Very cool. So before we dig into AI and
Manis, I want to ask you about the state
of cancer diagnosis that's making the
news. We're seeing a lot of headlines
about the rise of cancer in young
people. What do you make of that? Is
that just, you know, is it more cancer
for real or is it just better diagnosis?
Both.
>> I recently wrote a long piece for the
New Yorker about this. They, you know,
they asked me specifically to ask tackle
this kind of question. Is it more what
does diagnosis mean? Does it mean that
we have are diagnosing better? is it
doesn't mean that it's really cancer.
Now the problem with diagnosis is that
of course that if you invent a new
diagnostic test the minute you invent
the new diagnostic test the number of
diagnosis was going to grow go up
>> right
>> the most striking example is years ago
in South Korea
um they started giving out ultrasounds
uh to primary care doctors
>> okay
>> and they would use that ultrasound to
diagnose thyroid cancer
>> okay
>> and so the incidence of thyroid cancer
skyrocketed
>> right
>> the number of surgeries ies for thyroid
cancer skyrocketed. Um, guess what
difference there was to the deaths from
thyroid cancer?
>> I don't know.
>> Zero.
>> So, so that's an example where where
increased diagnosis does not mean
increased mortality. It means increased
diagnosis. That's what it means.
>> So, we are yet to find out. I mean I
would say that there are certain cancers
where we know for sure there has been an
increase in mortality modest increase in
mortality.
>> That's a real that's a real statistic.
>> For virtually all cancers there's been a
decrease in the United States of
mortality. I give I can give you real
numbers. So in 2000 the mortality from
cancer all cancers was 200 per 100,000
people.
>> Okay. in the year 2024 2025 it's going
to be on the order of 140 per 100,000
odd people. So there's been a a absolute
reduction in cancer mortality.
>> Now that's true for most cancers but
it's not true for some. So we'll have to
see whether these new diagnoses of uh
cancer in younger people really
translates into more increasing
mortality. Um, I would be I'm afraid it
might and in which case we'll have to
really find out why.
>> Yeah. All right, let's talk about Manis.
So, you and Reed recently founded MAIS
AI together. Um, and you've said Manis
AI is your leap of faith.
>> Manis AI is a leap of faith because I
when I started thinking about AI, I
thought that every aspect of drug
discovery um from end to end um was
inefficient
uh was not working. um and could be made
AI native and much much more efficient.
And by that I mean let's just walk
through them. So you start with a target
usually and by target I mean it's
usually a dysfunctional protein uh could
be a dysfunctional some kind of molecule
in a cell.
>> Um so that's your target. Um from there
on you you validate that target using
experimental methods in the laboratory
and then you try to use any mechanis any
mechanism either you know you try to jam
it with a small molecule like a lock
jamming a key or you try to prevent that
target from act being active using a
variety of strategies. Manis AI is a an
attempt to take all of these steps all
the way to human clinical trials and
make make them AI native. Right now our
focus is mainly on making molecular
generators. So we have partnerships that
do uh these other aspects of drug
development. Right now the centerpiece
of NSAI is to build a probably we hope
one of the world's most powerful
molecule generators. So a true
generative foundation model
>> for
>> for making new
>> molecules that will become drugs
>> and then would that would the business
model then become that you partner with
other pharma and biotech companies and
kind of license the molecule generator
to them?
>> Yeah, we license them. We license them
in partnership.
>> Okay.
>> So, uh we don't what we don't do just to
be very clear, we don't create
>> for instance enterprise software for
>> drugm. Okay. um we don't and you know we
use LLM a little bit but really we make
foundation models and then use those
foundation models to make new molecules
and then get those molecules out through
partnerships um with various companies
uh until you reach you know an
inflection point in
not financially but really an inflection
point medically. Yeah.
>> Um and that's the purpose of Manis AI. I
imagine that um you know biotech and
pharma have been using AI for years. So
what's different now?
>> So the kind of AI that biotech and
pharma have been using has I would say
very first generation AI. Um and in fact
it's not even clear that they have been
using AI um for true molecular
generation. Um so uh
>> but there's a lot of machine learning
baked into into the discovery process
already right
>> there is some machine learning baked
baked into some parts of the discovery
process and we can we can talk exactly
about where so there is certainly
machine learning baked into target
discovery what you want to send your
target to
>> um and you can imagine that's very
amendable to machine learning you can
imagine that's uh you know that's
something that LLMs would be very good
at you could search through vast spa a
vast data space to find uh targets and
that has become relatively AI native. So
those are now being incorporated into
drug discovery but they weren't before.
LLMs won't work here. You require you
can borrow some important principles
from LLMs and from uh what's been
learned before um like attention
>> um um like the the the nature of these
networks. But these are um I'm going to
use a a fancy word. I'm happy to explain
it, but these are true neurosymbolic
systems. A a neurosy symbolic system is
a system that incorporates on one hand
um neural networks and AI
um which of course um is important
because it's the learning aspect of it
but it's also symbolic in the sense that
it it it is constrained by the rules of
physics and chemistry. So just to give
you an an example, you could say that um
a a sentence generator has uh is is
largely uh dictated by uh tokenizing
language and then putting those tokens
together in a meaningful way. Um and it
has a little bit of symbolic uh gestures
like grammar, right?
>> But it's mostly uh mostly largely
governed by by that tokenization.
>> Yep. When now you when you enter the the
world of drug discovery, the symbolic
aspects take on a much much larger role
because you can you only have physics is
physics.
>> Chemistry is chemistry. You can't
violate those rules. Those rules are
inviable rules.
>> Yeah.
>> Think of it this way. An LLM for images
can make up a horse with five legs or a
camel with wings.
>> It can bend reality because in this
case, it's just generating a picture.
But to make medicine, you need a model
based on the immutable laws of physics
and chemistry. You actually don't want
it to make up something that cannot
exist in the natural world. So
off-the-shelf LLMs won't work here.
>> And so you have to build a system which
on one hand learns
>> but also is cognizant of the rules, has
to keep note of the rules. And then not
only that, it has to pay attention
>> to those rules. Some rules are more
important than other rules.
>> Right. Interesting. So it it
incorporates a a to build a foundation
model is much more complicated.
>> That's right.
>> What is the data you feed into these
models if it's going to be generative?
>> Uh so there's a lot of data out there.
It's mostly structural data. You know
since the 1960s
uh scientists have been depositing uh
structures uh crystal structures of
proteins uh into a database called the
PDB okay
>> protein database. It's a vast database.
It's a huge public service.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and so um we use some of that. We use
laws of physics and chemistry. We also
use programs like Alphafold. And
finally, we use um ideas like um a
particular again jargon molecular
dynamics. In other words, how does the
protein jiggle in space um in real time
and if if that jiggling makes a
difference to the fitting of a drug or
not. with my investor hat on. I invest
in early stage AI companies. I am
wondering what is your competitive moat?
If if all of your data sources, it
sounds like are these public data sets.
What makes Manis different?
>> Well, I think uh two or three big
differentiators I would say. Uh number
one is um we are not an enterprise
software company.
>> So we actually want to make medicines
and we want to make you want to make
Yeah. So
>> that's a big difference. Um uh that's a
strategic difference.
>> The second is that um even though the
there's a lot of data out there um we
are building a what I would think is one
of the world's most powerful foundation
models. Um it all depends on the model
>> and also these are very disparate data
sources. It sounds like how you
synthesize like the multimodal approach
for for that kind of
>> Exactly. That's right. I think the way
we harmonize the data all these data
sets is very different. It's
proprietary.
>> Yeah.
>> Um we have a very very proprietary
approach to making generative chemistry.
So we we do both. We do search and fit.
>> Mhm.
>> Which is non-generative. So you can
search molecular space and try to fit
that.
>> And I guess a AI helps make that faster,
more efficient. You
>> can make it faster, efficient, but it's
fundamentally not generative
>> because you're searching and fitting.
Um, one of the jewels in our crown is
that we are that we make also generative
we have a generative foundation model.
>> Yeah.
>> So in which we basically look at a
molecular pocket. I can't go into all
the details but we look at a molecular
pocket and try to actually make a
chemical that fits.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and that's completely new chemical
matter.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> the third big difference um is that we
are multimodal in a way companies most
companies are not. And by that I mean
we've already started making drugs that
are near we've have IP on those. These
are drugs that are moving towards clinic
right now. Um even as we speak they are
going through preINDD pre-clinical
um assets. They've been partnered.
They're sort of moving forward. Very
exciting space. Um so so that's one. We
have a sister company that we helped
launch called Athea
>> um which works on sirna. So RNA as a
drug.
>> Yeah. Which is which is the same kind of
technology behind the co vaccines I
think
>> for instance. It's a different kind of
RNA in this case.
>> Um and that's sisterred with these other
companies.
>> Yeah.
>> And that's uh so in other words we work
across molecular disciplines.
>> Um in fact we have a we have a sister
company or a partner company which does
cell therapy as well.
>> Interesting. Cell cell and gene therapy.
So um again that makes us very different
because we are multimodal
>> and being multimodal um I think there's
a there's a big difference in in terms
of the fact that we can combine
therapies. We can take an antibbody and
add to it a small molecule and make a
combined therapy that's a combination of
both. Um
>> the last point is that um
>> we have a global infrastructure. I think
it's important to note that um I think
the United States has basically priced
itself out of many clinical trials. Um
just to give you one example
um China in 201
uh the United States inlicensed about $5
billion of drugs from China. In 2025
that number is going to be about 60
billion.
>> Wow. Um so you can imagine how much of
work
>> is going on outside
of the US
>> and then and these are no longer fast
follower drugs. These are what we we
would call novel novels.
>> Um so we have a global infrastructure in
India. We have a global infrastructure
that's spreading across now into
Australia and other places and that's
another big differentiator for us.
>> Yeah. So let's say mana succeeds and you
will what will drug development look
like in the next I don't know decade and
then also if the whole thing becomes AI
native what will that mean for drug
development
>> well I think you know I think the the
ultimate aim is is uh uh cheaper faster
better
>> drug pharmaceutical companies claim
correctly in some cases uh and
incorrectly in some other cases that the
reason that you know your medicines
novel medicines cost hundreds of
thousands of dollars is because 90% of
them fail.
>> Yeah.
>> In early trials.
>> Um if you could change that number from
90% to even
>> let's say 60% uh s succeed you would
dramatically change the economics of
medicines.
>> And so that's the cheaper um the better
is if you start with garbage in you'll
end with garbage out. In a lot of cases
there's, you know, there's this problem
and they're not better because they
aren't um they're not using the power
the enormous power that we could have of
machine learning
>> and faster because uh obviously I just
gave you an example. um you know a human
being takes eight months to write an IND
machine learning enable AI native system
could take eight hours to write that
same IND survey the literature you know
come up with you know
>> take an initial stab at the draft of big
stack
>> yeah exactly fascinating um and again I
I'm really focusing on things that
aren't I don't think are sort of pipe
dreams
>> in some kind of distant
uh vacuous future. I'm talking about
things that are very proximately
available and there are companies that
already working on this right now.
>> Where is the human in the loop in all of
this?
>> So we've tried um we know we have human
in the loop at every step. Um so just to
give you one example, we recently
encountered a medicine um which was
moving very adv moving quite into into
quite advanced trials. our computational
chemists took one look at it and they
said that'll never make a medicine
because it's going to be so insoluble um
because it was a very aromatic planer
structure. Now you don't know. I don't
know. Well, I know. But um [laughter]
but these flat aromatic planer
structures which look like frisbes are
very insoluble.
>> Okay.
>> And they tend to make very bad drugs.
And so the trick is now to find out how
to
>> tweak that system. And now that
knowledge needs to be funneled back
>> so that so that if you look if you do a
search and fit
>> the next time
>> next time around, right? don't make a
structure that looks like that.
>> Yeah. Fascinating. One of my one of the
things I'm most excited about in the
kind of the intersection of AI and
health is this idea that we're at the
cusp of a health span revolution that's
more um it's it's personalized medicine,
but it's also like really focused on
wellness. And my thesis there is that
there's the trifecta of sensors which
are becoming ubiquitous data which is
also becoming kind of very accessible
and available and then both generative
and predictive AI. So zooming out of
kind of the cancer world and the disease
world where do you see kind of medicine
going and the role AI can play in that?
Well, I think I mean, you know,
obviously for any medical discipline, we
we know this has been proved time and
time again over and over again that
prevention is the prevention is better
than the cure. But you need a lot of
things in order to prevent. It's not so
easy to prevent. So there there are ways
to get around all of this. One of them
is sensors. So in other other words, a
sensor could be an AI native biomarker.
Um and by biomarker I mean it marks
something. It marks the future presence
of a disease.
>> Can you give me an example?
>> I'll give you an example. So take an EKG
or ECG uh as an example. So all of us
get ECGs and then a doctor looks at them
and says, "Oh, you have or don't have a
problem with your heart
>> in the rhythm, right? But there's much
much more information we now know in an
ECG. There small things that no one has
ever even looked at. And you need if you
put a massive data set together, right?
If you put a an a data set of let's say
uh you know five million ECGs
>> which exists
>> which exists by the way and it's and
it's digital
>> right
>> um and you ask the question which of
these people is likely to develop
congestive heart failure heart failure 5
years from now right that's a now all of
a sudden you've used that machine
>> right it's an AI it's an AI problem
>> so you can then say now I have the
platform because now I know instead of
taking a population which is un um
filtered
um I've converted this into a basian
problem now I know a population that's
going to develop a disease in the future
and I'm going to now make an
intervention whatever your intervention
might be and try to see if I can prevent
the disease uh from happening uh in the
future or not.
>> Yeah.
>> So this integration that you're talking
about is an enormously important thing.
So, um, my last question I always end
with, I ask of all my guests on the
show, what do you think it means to be
human in the age of AI?
>> I, uh, obviously am very, um, immersed
in the in the technology. So, I'll have
an answer which I hope doesn't sound
technocratic, but it sounds humanistic.
I also am a humanist. I write books. I I
care about compassion. I I'm a
physician. Um I think
>> your partner is an artist.
>> Exactly. So I think it's important that
we improve human lives um first. Um, and
that the goal should be to use the
machines that we're making and to to
make lives better. And I think they will
as long as we keep that in mind. And as
long as we don't make machines for the
sake of making machines and as long as
the goals are clear, the goals should be
to um increase compassion, dignity,
empathy, the great human qualities that
we have. um creativity and use these as
tools um rather than um ends in of
themselves. I think that's sort of what
it means to be a human in the age of AI.
>> I love it. Sid, thank you so much for
joining us on the show.
>> My pleasure. Thank you so much.
>> What Sid is doing with Manis AI is
[music] a perfect example of how AI can
be harnessed for the greater good of
humanity.
Sid [music] has spent decades advancing
cancer research and now AI is helping
supercharge that effort. We've often
spent time on the show talking about the
potential harms of AI. But conversations
[music] like this underscore how
powerful AI can be when it is used to
solve meaningful problems in [music] the
world.
>> [music]
>> What do you think? What are other ways
AI is supercharging benefits to
humanity? Reach out to us at [music]
6016332424.